                          SECOND ANNOUNCEMENT

                Saturn Ring Plane Crossing Workshop
                May 26-27, 1994
                Lunar and Planetary Laboratory
                Rm. 308, Gerard P. Kuiper Space Science Bldg.
                University of Arizona, Tucson

Reminders:
    * Room reservations are due by May 11
    * Reply to this email if you are planning to attend
    * Reply if you wish to receive a copy of the proceedings
    * Reply if you would like to contribute a short presentation


The Saturn Ring Plane Crossing Workshop is coming up in just a few
weeks.  The agenda is rapidly taking shape and is included at the end of
this message.  Thanks to all of you who have already agreed to speak. 

CONTRIBUTED PAPERS

Note that the meeting is intended to be very informal and the agenda
contains plenty of flexibility at this time.  Anyone who wishes to
contribute a ~10-minute presentation is encouraged to do so; please
inform Mark Showalter (showalter@ringside.arc.nasa.gov; 415-604-3382) of
your interests as soon as possible.

PROCEEDINGS

We plan to distribute an informal "proceedings" of the meeting to the
attendees and to those who are interested but unable to attend.  Please
reply to this email if you would like to receive the proceedings. 
Include your mailing address. 

To minimize the work of speakers, the proceedings will take the form of
a copy of all viewgraphs shown, plus any written material that the
speakers are able to provide.  Paper copies will be mailed out in early
June.  In addition, any slides and supporting information that the
speakers can provide in digital form (e.g. Postscript, TeX, plain ASCII
text, etc.) will be made available from the PDS Rings Node via anonymous
ftp (see below).

REGISTRATION

We would be grateful if you would reply to this message if you plan to
attend.  This rough "head count" will help us to better plan meeting
logistics (and to provide refreshments!) 

ROOM RESERVATIONS

Remember that room reservations are due by May 11.  We have a block of
rooms at the Plaza Hotel 602-327-7341 for the special rate of $49 (+tax)
for May 25-27.  To get this reduced rate, indicate that you are a
participant in the "Saturn Workshop" when you make your reservation.  If
you have any further questions about local arrangements, contact Steve
Larson (slarson@comet.lpl.arizona.edu; 602-621-4973).

FURTHER INFORMATION

An anonymous "ftp" site has been established at the PDS Rings Node for
further workshop information.  Just ftp into "ringside.arc.nasa.gov"
with user id "anonymous" and enter your own email address as the
password.  The subdirectory "rpx_workshop" will contain updated
information and Postscript files of maps to the meeting site.  Note that
the maps are not available at this time; look for them next week.  If
you have any questions or suggestions about the ftp site, contact Mark
Showalter (showalter@ringside.arc.nasa.gov; 415-604-3382).

Please pass this announcement on to any of your colleagues who might
also be interested.  We look forward seeing you in Tucson.

Mark Showalter
Steve Larson
Phil Nicholson


                        AGENDA

----------------------------------------------------
THURSDAY, MAY 26 -- Background and Scientific Issues
----------------------------------------------------

    9:00  Welcome, logistics (Larson)

    9:15  Geometry of crossings (Nicholson)
   10:00  Bright rings (Sicardy?, Lissauer)
   11:15  Faint rings (Showalter)

   12:30  Lunch

    2:00  Classical satellites (Harper, Jacobson, Aksnes)
    3:15  Small satellites (Murray)
    4:30  Discussion

    5:30  Adjourn

---------------------------------------------
FRIDAY, MAY 27 -- Observing Methods and Plans
---------------------------------------------

    9:00  Visual imaging (Larson)
    9:45  Near-IR imaging (Nicholson)
   10:30  Mutual event predictions (Descamps, Aksnes)
   11:15  Satellite photometry (Tholen?)
   12:00  Spectroscopy

   12:45  Lunch

    2:15  Observing campaign (Showalter)
    3:00  Discussion
    4:00  Adjourn

