Main Ring/Ring Halo

Flat main ring and a lenticular halo inside the main ring.

A mosaic of four images taken through the clear filter (610
nanometers) of the solid state imaging (CCD) system aboard NASA's
Galileo spacecraft on November 8, 1996, at a resolution of
approximately 46 kilometers (28.5 miles) per picture element (pixel)
along Jupiter's rings. Because the spacecraft was only about 0.5
degrees above the ring plane, the image is highly foreshortened in the
vertical direction. The images were obtained when Galileo was in
Jupiter's shadow, peering back toward the Sun; the ring was
approximately 2.3 million kilometers (1.4 million miles) away. The arc
on the far right of the image is produced when sunlight is scattered
by small particles comprising Jupiter's upper atmospheric haze. The
ring also efficiently scatters light, indicating that much of its
brightness is due to particles that are microns or less in
diameter. Such small particles are believed to have human-scale
lifetimes, i.e., very brief compared to the solar system's age.

<P>

Jupiter's ring system is composed of three parts - - a flat main ring,
a lenticular halo interior to the main ring, and the gossamer ring,
outside the main ring. The near and far arms of Jupiter's main ring
extend horizontally across the mosaic, joining together at the ring's
<A HREF="/glossary.html#ansa">ansa</A>, on the figure's far left side. The near arm of the ring appears
to be abruptly truncated close to the planet, at the point where it
passes into Jupiter's shadow. Some radial structure is barely visible
across the ring's <A HREF="/glossary.html#ansa">ansa</A> (top image). A faint mist of particles can be
seen above and below the main rings. This vertically extended "halo"
is unusual in planetary rings, and is probably caused by
electromagnetic forces pushing the smallest grains out of the ring
plane. Because of shadowing, the halo is not visible close to Jupiter
in the lower right part of the mosaic. To accentuate faint features in
the bottom image of the ring halo, different brightnesses are shown
through color. Brightest features are white or yellow and the faintest
are purple.

<P>

Jupiter's main ring is a thin strand of material encircling the
planet. The diffuse innermost boundary begins at approximately 123,000
kilometers (76,429 miles). The main ring's outer radius is found to be
at 128,940 kilometers (80,119 miles) +/-50 kilometers (31 miles),
slightly less than the Voyager value of 129,130 kilometers (80,237
miles) +/-100 kilometers (62 miles), but very close to the orbit of
the satellite Adrastea (128,980 kilometers or 80,144 miles). The main
ring exhibits a marked drop in brightness at 127,849 kilometers
(79,441 miles) +/-50 kilometers (31 miles), lying almost atop the
orbit of the jovian moon Metis at 127,978 kilometers (79,521
miles). Satellites seem to affect the structure of even tenuous rings
like those found at Jupiter.

<P>

<DT><B>Image Note:</B> <dd>Galileo Callisto 3 Orbit
</DL>

<BR>
<A HREF="http://www.jpl.nasa.gov/galileo/">
Galileo Home Page</A>
