Title: Adaptive optics observations of Saturn's ring plane crossing in
August 1995

Authors: F. Roddier, C. Roddier, C. Dumas, J. E. Graves, M. J. Northcott,
T. Owen (Institute for Astronomy, University of Hawaii), and A. Brahic
(Observatoire de Paris and Universite de Paris 7).

Abstract: An adaptive optics system developed at the University of Hawaii
was mounted on the 3.6-m CFH telescope on Mauna Kea and used to observe
Saturn during the August 95 ring-plane crossing. Near IR images of the ring
system were obtained with a resolution of 0.1 arc-sec. These images have
since been processed and analyzed both astrometrically and photometrically.

Evidence was found for a dozen of objects, probably clumps, orbiting at the
distance of the F-ring. Among these objects two of them have been
identified with objects 1995 S5 and S7 observed by the Hubble Space
Telescope.

An eclipse of Epimetheus was observed over about 10 minutes. We have
determined that Epimetheus was crossing the shadow produced by a region
extending from the F ring to the Encke division. The observed positions of
Epimetheus during the eclipse give constraints on its orbit, and on the
optical depth of the rings.

Photometric profiles have been obtained along the rings, and their time
evolution has been modeled. Values have been derived for the rings
brightness (compared to a Lambert diffuser). The gap between the A ring and
the F ring is found to contribute to the profiles with a transverse optical
thickness of the order of 0.0001. Evidence is also found for a composite
structure in the F ring with a geometrically thick component of very low
particle density.

