Hubble Spies Tiny Moons Circling Uranus

Several faint moons are seen circling Uranus, including a newly detected moon and a rediscovered satellite.

These images, taken with the NASA Hubble Space Telescope's Advanced 
Camera for Surveys (ACS), show several faint moons circling Uranus, 
including a newly detected moon and a rediscovered satellite. The 
planet's ring system can also be seen.

<p>
The arrow in the frame at right points to one of two newly discovered
moons, among the smallest moons yet found around Uranus. The moon is
temporarily designated as S/2003 U 1 until the International
Astronomical Union (IAU) formally approves its discovery. S/2003 U 1
is orbiting 60,600 miles (97,700 km) away from the planet. If the
satellite is as dark as Uranus's other moons, it is 10 miles (16 km)
across, about the size of San Francisco. The Hubble telescope spotted
this moon orbiting between the moons Puck, the largest satellite found
by Voyager, and Miranda, the innermost of the five largest Uranian
satellites. Astronomers previously thought this region was empty
space. S/2003 U 1 whirls around the gas giant planet in 22 hours and 9
minutes.

<p>
The arrow in the frame at left points to a rediscovered moon orbiting 
750 miles (1,200 km) away from the moon Belinda. The moon was detected 
in Voyager images, but the finding needed confirmation by an Earth-based 
telescope. Some astronomers think that S/1986 U 10 was once part of 
Belinda and broke off during a collision with a comet. Once certified by 
the IAU, these new discoveries will raise the number of Uranus moons to 
24. Thirteen of them orbit even closer to Uranus than the five largest 
satellites, which are hundreds of miles wide. The location of one of 
those five satellites, Miranda, is shown in the image. The satellite 
itself cannot be seen because its bright light has been blocked out.

<p>
Astronomers stretched the limit of the ACS to find the S/2003 U 1 and 
S/1986 U 10. The moons are 40 million times fainter than Uranus. Even 
with the high resolution and sensitivity of the ACS, astronomers had to 
overexpose the images of Uranus to pinpoint the moons.

<p>
The images were made from a series of exposures taken Aug. 25, 2003. In 
order to show the faint moons in these images, the light from the much 
brighter Uranus has been blocked out. A separate but much shorter 
exposure of Uranus has been inserted into the images for reference. All 
the moons appear streaked because they were moving in their orbits 
during the long exposures. The white specks in the background are image 
artifacts.
<p>Credit: <a href="http://www.nasa.gov/">NASA</a>, M. Showalter (Stanford University/<a href="http://www.nasa.gov/">NASA</a> Ames Research Center), J. Lissauer (<a href="http://www.nasa.gov/">NASA</a> Ames Research Center)</p>

<p>Source: <a href="http://www.hubblesite.org/newscenter/archive/2003/29/">Space Telescope Science Institute</a></p>
